<!--
SPDX-FileCopyrightText: 2025 Eli Array Minkoff

SPDX-License-Identifier: 0BSD
-->

<!-- Solution to Aoc 2018 day 19 Part 2 -->

# 2018 Day 19 Part 2

I tried to run it, but it took too long, so instead, I decided to adapt my solution to 2017 day 23 part 2.

## Take 1

Much like the previous Advent of Code puzzle, my plan was to start by with an AWK script to convert the input into C, then rewrite it in stages to get to the end result. Unfortunately, that requires using GCC's "labels as values" extension. *([thanks to qrdl on StackOverflow for explaining them](https://stackoverflow.com/a/938555))*. ~~Even with that extension, it's unfortunately got some out-of-bounds array indexing, and it returns 1 when compiled with `gcc`, `tcc`, and `clang` for some reason - probably a mistake on my part that'll come up while I'm working things out.~~ Edit: I realized that I had the order of the arguments wrong in the awk function to convert to C.

I decided that I'd start by seeing what `clang-19` does with it, now that it's available in the Debian repos, so I call it with `-c -S -emit-llvm -no-discard-value-names -O3`.

While there's a lot of information in `execute.ll`, what I find notable is what *isn't* there. The AWK script adds a label before each instruction, and there's an array of those labels at the start of the `execute` function. One of those labels is replaced in the LLVM IR with the `%cleanup` label, and several others have bodies consisting only of `br label %cleanup`, so I concluded that those labels were determined by the compiler to never actually be executed, so I thought I could remove them from my analysis.

### Stage 0

For stage 0, I simply removed every label from the jump table that `clang-19` appears to have ruled out as possible addresses, then ran `clang-19` on the output with the same arguments as before to see if any more labels were eliminated with a second pass. None were.

### Stage 1

First step was to simplify the control flow by removing extra jumps back and forth - If an instruction doesn't modify the instruction pointer, then the next instruction will be executed right away, so `goto cleanup;` can be replaced with `regs[IP_BINDING]++;`.

To do that, I first ran `:g/^ *regs\[<REDACTED>\]/s/regs.../regs[IP_BINDING]/` in Neovim, where `<REDACTED>` is the number that my input bound to the instruction pointer. I then ran `g/^ *regs\[\d.*\n *goto/s/\(\n *\)goto cleanup/\1regs[IP_BINDING]++`, which replaced any instance `goto cleanup` that did not follow a change to `regs[IP_BINDING]` with `regs[IP_BINDING]++`. I then removed the final `regs[IP_BINDING]++` from right before the `cleanup` label, to avoid double-incrementing the instruction pointer. I once again tried `clang`, but this time, the IR was much noisier - probably because it's `goto`s with control flow equivalent to a switch statement with a lot of fall-through.

### Stage 2

I rewrote the program as a giant switch statement. That didn't make things much clearer, either in C or LLVM IR, so I decided to see if there are any labels it only reaches through fall-through. To do this, I had to actually run the code for the first time since starting the analysis, and I ran into a problem - it was not actually looping. I went back through each previous stage, and found that it was actually going down code paths that I'd thought wouldn't have been triggered based on my understanding of the LLVM IR, so I decided to go back to stage 0.

## Take 2

I reworked the `awk` script to generate a switch statement from the start this time.

### Stage 0

I first repeated the steps from stage 1 of the previous take, but replaced the second vim command with `g/^ *regs\[\d.*\n *break/s/\(\n *\)break;/\1regs[IP_BINDING]++; \/\/ fallthrough`, to both replace `break` rather than `goto cleanup`, and add a comment so that compilers won't warn on the resulting fall-through. I then added a `printf` statement to print the `ip` value at the start of the loop, and ran it for 15 seconds to see what values were produced. I did not delete unused values, but I did save that information for future reference.

### Stage 1

I went back to the elfcode, adding in the instruction indexes before the instructions themselves, and adding line breaks before each instruction that was jumped to during stage 1. While re-reading the actual problem description, I realized that I was missing the forest for the trees here, so I decided to start over again.

## Take 3

Seeing that the semantics of certain instructions are likened to relative and absolute jumps in the description, I decided to try rewriting the code into another assembly-like language, but with pseudo-opcodes that might make it easier to recognize potential branch instructions. I used AWK for that, but because it requires multiple passes

### Stage 0: New Representation

The following changes are made to the input for further analysis
* The new opcodes remove the argument-type suffixes (i.e. `eqrr` becomes `eq`), and instead prefixes register ids with `r` to distinguish them.
* Relative jumps (i.e. `add` with both the output and one of the inputs set to the IP-bound register) are represented with `jrel`
* Absolute jumps (i.e. `set` with the destination set to the IP-bound register) are represented with `jabs`.
  * special case: `add` with the IP-bound register as an output but not either inputs is represented as a normal `add`
  * `set` with both input and output set to the IP-bound register is represented with `nop`.
* `set` instructions omit the ignored input 
* the destination parameter is moved to before the input parameters
* the IP-bound register is replaced with the instruction index when it's an input, or `ip` when it's an output

### Stage 1

Once I'd generated the version with pseudo-opcodes, and with operands rearranged to be ordered more like an actual assembly language, things were a lot clearer.

The opcodes actually seen are the following:

* `add`
* `eq`
* `gt`
* `jabs`
* `jrel`
* `mul`
* `set`

Because of this, I don't need to handle `bor` or `ban`.

The only time that `ip` is written to (other than `jabs` or `jrel` instructions) is an instruction which sets it to an out-of-bounds value (i.e. a halt instruction), so I replaced it with a new `halt` pseudo-opcode.

Based on these observations, I once again reworked `convert-to-c.awk`, but this time, it operates on the new representation from stage 0, rather than the original stage 1. It now no longer copies values back and forth between an instruction pointer and a register. It's now back to a series of `goto`s, and no longer needs an explicit instruction pointer variable. The labels for instructions are added after the instructions, to match the semantics of incrementing the instruction pointer after jumping.

### Stage 2: Removing some indirection

Any constant jump address was made to go directly to the label, without the indirection of looking it up in the jump table. Then, for register-offset jumps, given that there's no way for the registers to hold negative values, any label below the lowest offset can't be reached through the jump table, so I replaced them with NULL pointers within the table. Any unreachable labels were then deleted.

Then, for any instruction that jumped to a known address, I replaced its address within the jump table with the target address. Several of those instructions were then made unreachable, as there was a `goto` right before them, and the jump table now bypassed them in favor of the instructions they jump to, so I deleted them. To avoid undefined behavior, I added bounds checks to register-offset jump.

### Stage 3: Eliminate register-offset jumps


The first register-offset jump was right after the register in question was set to a boolean value, so the recently-added bounds check could be removed as it was clear it wouldn't go out-of-bounds, then it could be rewritten as follows:

```c
if (rM) goto LMM; // MM is the constant offset + 1
goto LNN; // NN is the constant offset
```

Furthermore, the `LNN` label was right after that conditional.

With that, more labels could be determined to be unreachable using the same analysis as stage 2, which meant that `LMM` and `LNN` were not otherwise reachable, so the conditional could be rewritten again, this time to `if (!rM) foo;`, where `foo` is whatever was between the `LNN` and `LMM` labels

That opened up the next register-offset jump to nearly the same approach, but the `LNN` label is one of the indirection labels removed during stage 2, so the `foo` in question became `goto LAA`.

Following that process brought it down to one register-offset jump, and brought the number of labels down to around ⅓ of the number at the beginning of stage 2.

Additionally, I combined consecutive arithmetic operations of the same kind, operating on the same register.

### Stage 4:

There was only one register-offset jump left at the end of stage 3, so I started by removing the constant offset from that jump, and removing all of the leading NULL pointers from the jump table. It then had identical semantics to a switch statement with fall-through, but with the `case` labels stored in the jump table rather than inline, so I simply rewrote it to be a switch statement. This made it possible to eliminate the jump table entirely.

The very first instruction is a `goto` to an otherwise-unused label halfway into the function, and the block before it ends with a `return` statement, so I moved everything before it to the end of the function. That made it clear that there were 7 consecutive operations to set 2 registers that only ran once each, so I simplified them into the end results.

After the constant values were set, I then noticed that the switch statement was now at the top of the function, and the register has a known value going into it, and there's no way to loop back to the start of it once it's done, so I was able to replace it with the linear path that it would resolve to anyway.

The code was now looking much simpler, and had a striking resemblance to nested for loops. There were only 2 labels left. It was looking much more manageable than it did at the start.

### Stage 5:

I rewrote the code into for loops, and removed unnecessary variables. It now has the following structure:

```c
unsigned long long elfcode(void) {
    unsigned long long r0 = 1;
    for (unsigned long long i = 1; i < CONSTANT; i++) {
        for (unsigned long long j = 1; j < CONSTANT; j++) {
            if (i * j != CONSTANT) {
                r0 += i;
            }
        }
    }
    return r0;
}
```

An inefficient algorithm, but an understandable one. I rewrote it in rust, but my answer was too high.

When trying to figure out why that might be, I realized that as part of the setup, register 0 gets reset to value 0, and that step got dropped during phase 4. With that in mind, the loop is actually equivalent to the following:

```c
unsigned long long elfcode(void) {
    unsigned long long r0 = 0;
    for (unsigned long long i = 1; i < CONSTANT; i++) {
        for (unsigned long long j = 1; j < CONSTANT; j++) {
            if (i * j != CONSTANT) {
                r0 += i;
            }
        }
    }
    return r0;
}
```

The answer was still too high, so I decided to try again to see what I got wrong.

## Take 3.5

I started with automated conversion to C using the tooling from take 3, and followed a similar process, so it essentially branches off from stage 1 of take 3.

### Stage 2

Much like stages 2 and 3 of Take 3, I iteratively eliminated unreachable labels, though this time I left the jump-to-jump instructions in place, and didn't add in the bounds checks now that I know they're not needed. I brought in a modified version of `relabel.py` from 2017 day 23 part 2 to remove unused labels, and manually removed any `goto` that jumps to a label right after itself. I once againrewrote all but one of the register-offset jumps to `if (reg) goto LMM; goto LNN`, and rewrote them again using the same process as stage 3 of take 3.

### Stage 3

I moved the block that's jumped to in the beginning and never again up to the start, and using the same process as before, removed unused code paths and replaced variables with known values with their values, and once again had what looked like setting a constant then running through nested for loops. I converted the calculations into Python to run it in a REPL to avoid the risk of human error, and it came out to the same constant as the previous take.

### Stage 4

I once again rewrote it as nested for loops, and ended up with the following - the same, except for the `<=` instead of the `<`:

```c
unsigned long long elfcode(void) {
    unsigned long long r0 = 0;
    for (unsigned long long i = 1; i <= CONSTANT; i++) {
        for (unsigned long long j = 1; j <= CONSTANT; j++) {
            if (i * j != CONSTANT) {
                r0 += i;
            }
        }
    }
    return r0;
}
```

I decided to rewrite my rust implementation again, but it still got the wrong answer.

### Stage 5

I reviewed my work, and found that when unravelling the spaghetti, in stage 2, I'd accidentally flipped an `==` into the `!=`, so I was summing every number except for the ones I was supposed to. No wonder it was passing the 64-bit integer limit!
